---
title: Overview
nav: true
--- 

# Digital Preservation: An Overview

Digital preservation is defined as the “formal endeavor to ensure that digital information of continuing value remains accessible and usable.” This means that our main goals in Digital Initiatives and this lab are two-fold: Our first goal being access, our second goal being use. The University of Idaho Library houses thousands of primary research sources, most held in Special Collections and Archives. In and of themselves, these sources provide insight to not only the history of the University, Idaho, and the Northwest, but also Agricultural Science development and Life-Science development. 
We are the forefront of making these sources accessible and usable for the public and for researchers, locally and around the world. Our digitization efforts allow the information in materials to be accessed more broadly and used for more projects while still keeping originals intact and available for local, non-circulating, use. The images we create, the information we publish, all directly relates to the original source material; our descriptions, our dates, our titles, all relate to our goals of access and use.  

The materials we are working with in this lab are not designated to leave the library either because of their value (irreplaceable, original copy, monetary cost of replacement) or their condition (too fragile to circulate, too delicate to withstand continuous handling). Because of this, it is our job to accurately represent information in a way that upholds the integrity of the materials. This means that we must provide accurate and detailed descriptions of items (photographs, texts, journals, etc.) and do our best efforts to research subjects, dates, and locations in order to make access and use possible for the largest possible audience. 

Metadata, or “data about the data”, is how we provide all of the related information about an item to our audience. In this lab, we follow the Simple Dublin Core Metadata Practices, a set standard for types of information and how it is formatted; these standards make it easier for people creating metadata to know that the information they are creating is usable and accessible across multiple search platforms and research methods.   How we apply these standards across all fields are laid out in the procedures portion of this document.  

Digitizing collections and materials is a large part of what we do to provide access. Ways that we digitize materials include scanning, photographing, transferring, and recording. Each of these results in a digital copy of an “analog” (hard-copy) item. Each format has a standard that we strive to achieve, and guidelines for editing and finalizing digital copies. Scanned items result in the creation of three digital copies; audio formats result in two digital copies; video formats can range from one copy to two. The standards for each of these digitized method will be covered in the procedures portion of this document.  
